## The Falling Rate of Profit Explains Falling US Growth ##
Existing measures of the rate of profit fail to accurately account for the drain on surplus value imposed by government spending, and the effects of wage earners’ saving on the surplus value available to the corporate sector. This repo calculates a new measure of the average rate of profit that takes these into account.

For Marx (1951, 154), to count towards new value produced, goods and services must be produced for sale by the expenditure of labour power; i.e., they must be produced commodities. But national accounts make various imputations that extend their definition of value added beyond this boundary. For example, the US national accounts impute final output to the government, household and non-profit sectors based on the cost of their inputs. But the overwhelming majority of this ‘output’ is not produced for sale, and a large proportion is not ‘output’ according to any other reasonable understanding of the term either. So, for example, all military employees are counted as producing final ‘output’ equal to their wages, and the depreciation of all military equipment and structures is also counted in the same way (US Bureau of Economic Analysis 2011, 9–4).

However, some output of the government and non-profit sectors is produced for sale. Government run utilities, health and education facilities, for example, charge fees to many of their customers, patients and students, and this both reduces the cost to the state of providing these services, and should be counted as new value produced. To account for this, I have subtracted the value added that is imputed to the government sector from GDP, but added back in government ‘sales to other sectors’.

Next, consider the valued added that national accounts impute to the household and non-profit sector. A large proportion of this value added is imputed to the housing stock. Effectively, national accounts treat residential fixed assets as though their depreciation transfers value to output; and, on top of that, they generate extra value by 'producing' 'housing services' (US Bureau of Economic Analysis 2011, 2–16, 2–17). That is, consistent with neoclassical theory, they treat houses as ‘fixed capital’ that produce value for their owners. For this reason, they count both actual rent paid by tenants to landlords (for the house only, and not the land) and the ‘rent’ that owner occupiers ‘pay themselves’ as output. But from a Marxist perspective, none of this is a payment for new value or even a transfer of existing value to output. A tenant pays their landlord for the privilege of using a commodity that has already been produced; the value of their house was counted towards output when it was first constructed (and as further investments in it are made). Since houses are overwhelmingly not used as inputs to production, but to live in, they do not transfer the value of their depreciation to output, and they certainly do not produce extra value on top. So we want to subtract all of this ‘value added’ from GDP.

Now consider employees in the household sector. These are people directly employed by others in a private capacity: that is, to produce use values for the household to consume directly, and not to produce output for sale. Domestic servants, for example, are ‘household employees’. Marx (1951, 153–154) deals with this case explicitly, and argues that they are not productive workers, since they are not employed to produce commodities. So we will subtract all the value added imputed to the household sector from GDP.

Output of non-profit institutions is a mixture. Some output from this sector is genuine value added: for example, the services provided for a fee by schools and hospitals. But the output for which they do not charge a fee is not genuine value added. From 1958 onwards the national accounts include an estimate of ‘receipts from sales of goods and services by nonprofit institutions’, so we can include this as genuine value added, and subtract the rest of the value added attributed to this sector (before 1958 I have assumed that this revenue as a share of output is the same as for 1958).

Finally there is the business sector. Consider non-financial business first. Not all the labour performed by business employees is productive labour: e.g. supervisory labour and work involved in selling already existing commodities. But the national accounts treat this as an ‘intermediate input’ rather than an addition to final output. When a commodity is sold by the retail sector, for example, its contribution to business gross value added is just the price paid for the commodity, and the ‘value added’ by retail employees is treated as part of the cost of producing and selling the commodity. So it would be wrong to subtract ‘value added’ by the retail sector from final output, since by doing so we would be subtracting a portion of the sale price of the final commodity.

Similarly, for Marx, the entire financial sector is unproductive. But most of the ‘value added’ that national accounts attribute to the financial sector is also treated as an intermediate input, and not as final output. For example, when a bank lends money to a business, the spread between the rate of interest charged to the business and the rate of interest received by the deposit holder is counted as an intermediate input into producing the output of that business. The implication of this treatment is that the bank is ‘adding value’ by acting as an intermediary between borrower and lender. But since this value added is treated as an intermediate input, it does not add to final output, so we should not subtract it. However, the accounts do treat the interest rate spread on money lent to households and foreign entities as final output, so we do need to subtract this from output. I have done this by subtracting from output households’ consumption of financial and insurance services and net exports of ‘other private services’. ‘Other private services’ includes “financial services, insurance services, and business, professional and technical services” which would overwhelmingly be non-productive. Before 1967 there is no data for net exports of ‘other private services’, but by 1967 it becomes negligibly small, so we can safely assume it is zero from 1948-67.

We will call output defined in this way **‘Gross Revised Output’**, or **GRO**:

**GRO** ≡ GDP (NIPA 1.1.5, line 1) – government gross value added (NIPA 1.3.5, line 8) + government sales to other sectors (NIPA 3.10.5, line 11) – household and non-profit gross value added (NIPA 1.3.5, line 5) + receipts from sales of goods and services by non-profit institutions (NIPA 2.3.5, line 24) – personal consumption of financial and insurance services (NIPA 2.3.5, line 20) – exports of ‘other private services’ (NIPA 4.2.5, line 22) + imports of ‘other private services’ (NIPA 4.2.5, line 46) – net corporate profit from housing (NIPA 7.4.5, line 22) – net proprietors’ income from housing (NIPA 7.4.5, line 20) – depreciation of residential fixed assets owned by businesses (NIPA 7.5, line 13 + line 14). 

This is intended to approximate the total price of all commodities produced. So unlike standard measures of GDP, it does not purport to be a measure of the ‘total welfare’ that people obtain from consuming goods and services. For example, if education starts to be provided for a fee where previously it was free, then GRO will increase, even if fewer people are able to access education as a result, and even if it reduces the productivity of the living labour on which capital depends.

If we subtract depreciation, then we get **'Net Revised Output'**, or **NRO**. Since we have excluded most of the gross ‘output’ produced outside the business sector, we need to avoid subtracting depreciation on non-business assets twice. So we only subtract an estimate of the depreciation component of the revenue paid to non-business sectors (i.e., only on the value of the fixed assets used to produce new commodities), along with depreciation on non-residential fixed assets owned by businesses:

**NRO** ≡ **GRO** – depreciation of non-residential business fixed assets (NIPA 7.5, line 3 - NIPA 7.5, line 13 – NIPA 7.5, line 14) – [government sales to other sectors (NIPA 3.10.5, line 11) / government gross value added (NIPA 1.3.5, line 8)] * depreciation of non-residential government fixed assets (FA 1.3, line 10 - line 19) – [receipts from sales of goods and services by non-profit institutions (NIPA 2.3.5, line 24) / non-profit gross value added (NIPA 1.3.5, line
7)] * depreciation of non-profit non-residential fixed assets (NIPA 7.5, line 20).

I am not sure if this measure has much interest for its own sake, so have not reported the results for it.

To get to **Corporate Surplus Value (CSV)**, next we subtract an estimate of consumption funded out of wage income, government social benefits and non-corporate business income. But there is a significant problem here. The national accounts compare personal income with personal consumption expenditure for the population as a whole, so it is not possible to distinguish the average propensity to spend wages, social benefits and non-corporate business income from the average propensity to spend other personal income. Instead, we have to calculate a general average propensity to consume all income, and just apply this; even though this is likely to be lower than the average propensity to spend wages, social benefits and non-corporate business income (since we would expect recipients of this income to be poorer on average than recipients of other income, and therefore to spend a higher proportion of their income). 

To do this, I have also adjusted the personal consumption expenditure figures in the national accounts to remove rent and spending on financial and insurance services, since these items are in fact transfers of value, not expenditure of value. I have also revised aggregate personal income by subtracting the housing rent that the national accounts count as imputed income for owner occupiers, since this is not actually income. Non-corporate investment in housing is accounted for separately, as part of non-corporate investment in fixed assets. This is a significant limitation of this approach.

To make this estimate we also assume that the value of wage earners’ consumption is equal to the total cost of buying the commodities consumed. This makes it a single system interpretation of Marx’s value theory.

To get to **Corporate Non-Fictitious Profit (CNFP)**, we also need to subtract government and non-profit institutions’ spending on commodities other than labour power (since we have already subtracted consumption by all wage earners), and net investment and personal consumption by non-corporate private owners of houses and businesses. The full definition of corporate non-fictitious profits is provided in the appendix.

# Additional assumptions and limitations #

We also have to assume that the total price of (revised) net output in the US is equal to the total new value produced by workers. But ideally this should only be axiomatically true at the level of the world economy as a whole, not for the US economy considered in isolation. This means we are not taking into account the net surplus value that is either appropriated from or extracted by the rest of the world. This assumption is very common for Marxists working on the rate of profit because it is difficult to relax (and we do not even have an adequate theory of how we might relax it). In any case, if we want to test whether the rate of profit can explain grow in output, then we want to include the value that is appropriated or lost due to any difference between the total price and total value of output. So, in a way, this is nevertheless the correct approach.

Since this approach is based on a single system interpretation, there is no need to calculate surplus value in hours.

There is also a more general problem with making detailed adjustments to the national accounts such as these. If they are well-justified, the results that detailed adjustments produce can be considered more accurate results, and can help us to understand reality better – a goal I think these results achieve. But detailed adjustments can also be used, consciously or unconsciously, to ‘fiddle’ results to help achieve a pre-determined outcome, and this is not always easy for the reader to identify. So I have also calculated a simpler measure of the rate of profit that is still responsive to increases in government borrowing, but subtracts wages rather than an estimate of employees’ consumption. It starts with (ordinary) net domestic product less compensation of employees, which is a very basic measure of ‘broad’ surplus value. Then it subtracts government spending on consumption and investment, and government social benefits to persons net of contributions to social security, to arrive at a rough estimate of ‘non-fictitious’ profits. 

So the ‘simpler’ measure of rate of profit is defined as [net domestic product (NIPA 1.9.5, line 1) – compensation of non-government employees (NIPA 1.10, line 2 – NIPA 6.2 A to D, compensation of govt. employees) – government spending on consumption and investment (NIPA 3.9.5, line 1) – net government social benefits to persons (NIPA 2.1, line 17 – line 25] / corporate non-residential fixed assets at current cost (FA 4.1, line 17 – line 20). The main differences between this measure and the one above are that workers’ are assumed to consume all their income, and there is no attempt to remove the various imputations that the national accounts use to calculate net output.
